---
layout: post
title: Football Analytics Ideas
category: FA
---

## Overview

The demand for football is pretty high. Look at salaries. But I'm starting to believe there isn't much intellectual horsepower in it. Why? Probably because nerds don't like football. Well, there is the alpha/arbitrage here. I believe there are 3 main problems:


* Overlapping effects - When we see some outcome or effect in football, we know there are a myriad of contributing factors. The question is how to orthogonalize out effects we know to isolate the idiosyncratic return. For example, consider the problem of assessing managers.
* Counterfactuals (Neyman-Rubin) - When we look at stats, they are context dependent (see first point). The team affects the player's stats and the players individual contributions affects the team.
* The Eye Test - How do we quantify what we see with our eyes into statistics? And vice versa? 

# Data Classification 

Aggregation level: per match > per season

* Competition Level - league tables, cup tables 
* Match Level - Match results, match statistics (numerical, spatial) 
* Team Level - Salaries (player, manager), transfers (player, level) 
* Player Level - Statistics (per match, per season), physical measurements

## Websites

* Stathead/FBRef ($9/month)
* Statsbomb (Seems expensive)

## APIs

* FBRef API
    * https://fbrapi.com/
* Transfermarket API
    * https://github.com/dcaribou/transfermarkt-datasets (dcaribou)
    * https://github.com/felipeall/transfermarkt-api (felipeall) 
* Kaggle
    * https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/davidcariboo/player-scores (dcaribou)
    * https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/armin2080/premier-league-matches-dataset-2021-to-2025 (armin2080)
    


## Player Assessment with Stats

How do we optimally make use of statistics to scout players? Say, examine successful players per position - take a look at their stats, extrapolate to scout new players. Like factors driving returns.

* Find a measure of player success per position. E.g market value/wages normalized by age or players, or highest mkt val increase. 
* For the most successful and least successful players: find statistics that impact that the most.
* Can be used as scouting tool for transfers by just looking at statistics

More detailed plan:

* Determine a target variable that is a proxy of player success: For each starting age/year of birth, for each position, for each year, sort players with highest increase in market values forward over next $t$ years. For example.
* Have some treatment for the statistics per player on a team/league level to take into account the influence of team/league on statistics. Aka orthogonalize out against the team/league factors. E.g Wirtz playing in B04, an attacking team, in a farmers league (BuLi).
* Regress residualized statistics across years/seasons against target.
* Take the statistics with most impact / highest coefficients

Problem:

* Finding the right dependent variable is difficult. Many ways to construct it. 
* Statistics generated by players in matches are dependent on their team and league. For example, the argument that Portugese league strikers score tonnes of goals but flop in the higher leagues when they transfer.

## Player Assessment with Physical Attributes

Are there optimal physical metrics per position (arm movement, touch density, leg to torso, torso uprightness) that can determine a player's success in scouting? This relates to the eye test. For example, we can see Messi clearly has some interesting different physical attributes when he plays that contributes to his success. But how to quantify these in numbers is a problem.

## Managerial Assessment

Quantifying manager performance. We know managers have alpha and beta. Alpha being their idio return and beta being their factor returns (current squad, budget, support). Can we isolate the alpha or idio returns of each manager, netting off the effects of their current squad wages and net spend over their tenure?

* Regress wages and net spend on league position, across all leagues in cross section, across multiple seasons.
* Each residual in the datapoint is associated with a manager and that season.
* Aggregate by summing the residuals per manager tenure.
* Take the managerial alpha residuals and regress against managerial wages.
* Now you have a ranking of which managers have the highest alpha, and also which managers are rich/cheap relative to their alpha.

Problems

* The residuals or league position is not linear in net spend/wages: from 2 > 1 requires more spending/wages than from 20 > 19. How do we normalize for this? Feature transform?
* Other factors apart from wages/net spend: for example, sudden breakout seasons by low-wage players, like Gareth Bale at Tottenham or Michu at Swansea. How do we normalize for this? Use player market value instead of wages?
* Other factors apart from wages/net spend: for example, long term injuries (e.g season ending ligament tears). Add in injury time into the regression? But need to weigh by player impact.. 

## Injuries

Can we predict which teams get the most injuries? 

* Run regression with distance ran and total substitute minutes on injury time per season.
* Should be able to prove that better substitute management results in less injuries.

## Results Betting

The traditional sports betting avenue. 

Andrew Mack wrote some sports betting books. Also, knowledge from systematic equity trading should be applicable here.

The core would be a **predictive model** that takes in features and outputs signals/predictions, feeding into another **trading layer (risk management/bet sizing)** + a dicsretionary layer of adjustments (e.g from watching games + reading fan forums to understand the situation) to output trades, and we **rebalance/bet weekly**.

The key idea is: how much signal does past information of football matches have in the outcome of the next match?

The core problem is: You can outplay a team on XG but still lose, and vice versa, and this can happen for streaks - making XG a problem.

In terms of features:

* **Core momentum feature**
    * EWMA window of league/point-weighted time-weighted XG differentials - prior XG differentials should encode performance, XG mean reverts to true performance (another hypothesis that needs testing). 
    * EMWA window of league/point-weighted time-weighted goal differentials - The true realized outcomes of matches, in case teams can consistently outperform/underperform XG due to structural reasons.
* Home and away feature
    * Idea being certain teams have more home advantage than others. How to quantify? Can we fuse it into core momentum features.
* Injury feature
    * An injury score where player injuries imply the squad is weakened for the next match. This would be tricky because of player importance and substitutability. 
    * We would have to quantify player importance. Ratings maybe?
* Manager H2H feature
    * Some kind of H2H manager score, hypothesis being certain managers just tactically have each others number.
* Referee feature
    * Idea being that sometimes referees have biases against certain teams.
* Informed fan feature
    * Some sentiment indicator of reddit/forum results - only if the informed fans have predictive power.


In terms of football tropes we see often:

* There is this expectation that if you play well, but you lose, you should in theory win more in the future, vice versa. This should be encoded in XG. For example, Liverpool led the 25/26 season for the first 5-10 games scraping last minute winners etc.
* Big chances or big saves define games. If a shot goes in just a few inches, the whole outcome changes and your whole bet is fried.

In terms of the core momentum feature:

* Again the fundamental problem is that you can have games where one team wallops the other on XG but still loses by a margin. Is there some feature that was missing?
* League/point-weighted is a proxy the problem of odds: a higher placed team should beat a lower placed team. An XG against a low point team is less than an XG against a high point team. So you need to calibrate your XG by points differential. Problem is this feature only gains predictive power as the league progresses, at the start its basically useless.
* Time-weighted is a proxy of the idea that last minute winners are not very sustainable. So you weigh your XG by when the goals are scored: a 1-0 in the 1st half and set up shop in the 2nd is much less close than a match with same XG from a last minute winner.
* EWMA or some windowing function should solve the decay problem: recent data is higher weighted because things tend to change. Problem: we know Liverpool 25/26 went on a winning streak in the first few games of the league with last minute winners. They kept winning until they didn't. So how could a model capture when they break the streak and lose?

In terms of research:

* Look at match threads/data from the most XG-failed matches and try and figure out the pattern.

In terms of data:

* Fixture results - Just two numbers per fixture - 
* Additional fixture details - Referee, managers.
* XG results - Just two numbers per fixture - UnderStat
* Injury data - Injury list -
* Referee data - who referees which fixture.


